Hello again!
In this video, we are going to look at integer operations and threads.
On modern hardware, integer operations are always performed as a single processor instruction.
There are some exceptions.
If the data does not fit into a single word, if it is spread across more than one word, that does not
apply.
But otherwise, it does.
A processor cannot be interrupted while it is performing a instruction.
So this means that if we have a thread that is performing an integer operation, it cannot be interrupted.
So this raises an interesting possibility.
If we're using an integer for shared data, do we still need to lock it?
Well, let's find out.
I have got some code here which uses a shared integer variable.
We have a task function which is going to increment this 100,000 times.
You will notice there are no mutexes, but this cannot be interrupted, and then we are going to have some
threads which execute this 10 times.
So if we do ten lots of 100,000 increments, we should have a final value of one million.
Obviously, if we are going by the classic C++ definition, we have a data race because we have a single
memory location which is accessed by multiple threads with modification.
So let's see if it works.
No! No, it does not.
The answer is five hundred and forty six thousand, four hundred and fifty six, which is less than one million.
So some of the increments are being lost,
it looks like.
So we must have gone wrong somewhere.
The reason is that our assumption is that the plus plus operation cannot be interrupted, which is correct.
However, if we are incrementing a variable, there is actually three separate operations.
So that is actually interruptible
To understand the problem a bit better, we need to learn something about how computers work.
This is very, very simplified.
Modern computers are very complicated.
I am not going to make things any more complicated than they have to be.
So let's pretend it is 1980, 1985, we have a computer which has a single processor and some RAM.
And screen, obviously, and maybe a hard disk or floppy disk drive, but that is not important.
The processor has some memory cells which are called registers, and these are used for storing data,
which the processor is working on.
When we execute a C++ program, the instructions are executed by the processor, the variables are stored
in RAM, and when the processor needs to do some operation on a variable,
it fetches the value from
RAM into a register.
Then it does its operation and then it will save the new value of the variable back to RAM.
So data is constantly being copied from RAM into registers and back again.
If we imagine that we are running a threaded program on this very simple computer.
Every time a thread is interrupted, a task switch occurs. This means that the values of the registers are
backed up on the processor and the values that the new thread needs for its registers are loaded up.
And then when that thread gets interrupted, its registers are backed up and another thread's registers
are loaded up and so on.
And data is loaded from RAM into processor registers as needed and if necessary, written back to
RAM after it has been modified.
So getting back to our program, we got a strange number because there is a data race, but why is there
a data race?
And the answer is that incrementing a variable involves three operations. We need to copy the value of the
variable from RAM into the register.
Then the processor will increment the value in its register and then the new value of the variable
has to be written back to the storage in RAM.
These are being executed as threads, which run concurrently, so they could be interrupted at any time
and another threat could run and do any one of these steps.
In particular, if we get interrupted after we do the increment, but before we do the update and then
another thread runs which will do the update.
So the second thread will write some value into count, and then when this thread wakes up, it will
write its own value into count and overwrite the value from the previous thread.
To see why this could be a problem, let's say we have a thread which runs. It gets the value of count,
which could be 123. It will copy that into the processor's register, then the increment
will take it to 124.
And then at that point, the thread is interrupted.
The register values are backed up.
Thread B runs. Its register values are loaded up.
It copies the value of count, which is still 123, because Threat A has not updated
it yet.
Then thread B will increment it to 124, then thread B will save the value 124 in RAM and go to
sleep.
Then thread A will wake up. Its register values are going to be restored.
It has the value 124 in its register, and it is going to write 124 in count.
So at the start of this, the value of count was 123. It has been incremented twice, but its value
is finally 124.
So one of the increments has been lost, due to thread A overwriting thread B's value.
So we need to ensure somehow that thread A cannot be interrupted until it has written its value and then when
thread B runs, it will get the new value.
We have already seen how to do this with a mutex. We just call lock() and unlock(). lock() will prevent
other things from executing the critical region and unlock() will make the critical region available and
also release the value of the shared variable.
We can do this here by declaring count as an "atomic" variable.
And in this case, the compiler will generate special processor instructions, which will synchronize
the threads.
So this is actually different from a mutex.
A mutex is a library object.
It will make calls into the operating system for the operating system to manage the locks.
With an atomic
variable,
the compiler will generate special code, which will make the processor perform in a special way, to
make sure that the threads are synchronized so the thread will not be interrupted until it has written
the new value and the next thread will get the new value.
So using an atomic variable will have a similar result to using a mutex in terms of safety.
So this means we now have two ways of avoiding a data race.
In the next video, I will show you how to create atomic variables, but until then, keep coding!